The Joe Rogan experience. The idea that there's an,
an enormous number of you making various choices. Yeah.
And that these various choices will ultimately affect how long you exist.
In some branches. So there is a weird thing called quantum imortality,
which I think is a bad idea. And I don't like to talk about it,
but people hear about it. So I sometimes need to mention it max tagmark,
who is a friend of mine and very smart guy popularized this idea. He said, look,
what, and it's a little bit, MCAB sorry about this a little bit, uh, you know,
weird the experiment, but imagine you're doing,
you're playing quantum Russian ruleette so you have your universe.
Splittter okay. You have app on your iPhone and you split the universe.
And if it goes one way, you don't do anything. If it goes the other way, uh,
faster than you can react, a machine is activated. That kills you instantly.
Okay. So you, you don't even know it. You don't even perceive it.
You don't have any pain, you just instantly dead. Um,
and you do this over and over and over and over and over again.
So in most branches of the way you function, you're dead.
But in those you're dead, you don't know anything. You don't,
you don't feel like you're dead. You know, there's no ex regret after the fact,
the only version of you that survives is the one that was lucky enough to be in
the branch where you didn't die every single time.
So techmark's argument was that the, if you do this over and over again,
and you survive,
you should take that as good evidence that the many world's interpretation of
quantum mechanics is correct.
<laugh> because in other versions you probably just died. Right? Um,
I don't think that's quite right.
I don't think that's a good way to go through your life.
I think that the reason why we don't want to die is not just that we will
experience pain, but that sort of
prospectively right now, the idea of being dead in the future bothers me. Right?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> like, I, if someone said, you know,
you're going to die in this, in that date might be useful information,
but I'd be sad, right? If that date was soon.
And I think the same thing is true in the quantum mortality experiment. I,
I don't buy the move that says, well, all the branches where you're dead,
it doesn't matter. Cuz you're dead. You don't feel anything.
Like I think that right now it's okay for me to be bothered by the prospect that
in many future worlds I will not be there. So I, you know,
I think that at the end of the day, once again,
you should act in quantum mechanics, just like you act in the regular world.
Are there competing theories to this,
that this many world's theory that you've embraced and then discarded? Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. There abso there's two big ones that are, that are quite popular.
Um, one is more or less what Einstein had in mind,
which are called hidden variable theories. So basically, you know, if you have,
uh, an electron and you say, look, when I'm not looking at it,
it's wave-like when I look at it, it's like, particle-like, maybe it's both.
Maybe there is a wave and there is a particle. So in a hidden variable theory,
there's a wave function just like there is in many worlds,
but there's also another set of variables saying there's really a location of
the electron, right? Maybe I don't know where it is,
but there really is an electron located somewhere.
And that location of the electron is pushed around by the wave function,
but it's a whole new part of reality.
So there's not so that there's separate branching of the wave function and all
that stuff. But that none of that is reality where reality is,
is where the particles are.
And this is now called bomian mechanics at bone in the 1950s
developed the most, uh, respectable version of this. Um,
it's sort of therapeutic if you don't like all the other worlds, it's basically,
you know,
the equations are the same as many worlds except there's new equations and new
stuff. So it complicates the theory by adding new variables. Uh,
but the good news is it says only one of the branches of the way for function is
real. I don't need to worry about the other ones. The problem is it's very hard.
My, my particular problem is it's very hard to reconcile these ideas with modern
physics. Like if you thought the world was made of individual particles,
it would be do okay.
But these days we use quantum field theory and quantum gravity and things like
that. And those more modern ideas are harder to attach hidden variables too.
So hidden variables are, you know, an old idea, but, uh, they're,
I think that they're hard to make work. The other idea, which is more dramatic,
a little bit more fun is every single electron has a wave function.
And it seems to you that when you observe it, it collapses, but,
but maybe what's really going on is the following that there's a random
probability of re second that every electron will just spontaneously collapse.
So it's all spread out,
but it's way function just randomly lo localizes to some particular region of
space. Very,
very rarely like if you have one electron and you wait for it to happen,
it will happen like once every a hundred million years. Okay.
But if I have lots of electrons, like in a table,
there's way more than a hundred million electrons in this table. There's,
there's, you know, billions and billions and billions of electrons.
So somewhere in the table, all the time,
an electron is localizing at one particular position.
And because that electron is entangled with all the other electrons,
the table maintains a location in space, and this is,
uh, spontaneous collapse or G R w theory after the initials of the people who
invented the theory.
And the great thing about G R w theory is that it's experimentally
distinguishable from many worlds because it says that if I have a collection of
atoms, even if I'm not observing it, even if I'm not entangling it,
one of the wave functions should spontaneously localize occasionally,
and that will heat it up. Energy is not in this theory.
So people are doing experiments to test this. So it's really, you know,
legit experimental science.
Adams,
the current perception by the general public of Adams is that
it's mostly empty space.
Yeah. This is not.
Good idea. This is not true. <laugh> well or not correct or not. It's.
Certainly not what many world says, right? So this is, you know,
there are two enormous problems with our current way of presenting quantum
mechanics. One is the measurement problem, which is this question like,
what do you mean, look at it? What do you mean observe? Like what, what,
what actually happens when does that happen? That's the measurement problem.
But the other problem is what I unhelpfully call the ontology
problem. <laugh> is ontology is the philosophy of being of what is real,
what is actually existing. So we just talked about hidden variable theories.
So in Everett, what's real is the wave function.
The way function of the universe describes the universe. Exactly. And,
and completely in many world in, uh, hidden variable theories.
There's a wave function and there's also particles. So there's extra ontology,
extra pieces of reality. So the question of is the Adam mostly empty space
depends on, on what you think is real.
So the wave function of the electron fills the atom.
So if you're a many worlds person like me,
you think what is real is the wave function.
It fills up the atom and the atom is not most the empty space.
The atom is the wave function. It has that size, right?
You get the feeling that,
that atoms are the empty space because you think that really the electron is a
point and the way function is just telling you where you might see it when you
measure it. When well, yes,
so many worlds says there's no such thing as where it is.
There's only a probability of seeing it. Everyone knows that,
but people kind of die.
They talk as if there really is a location of the electron,
even if they should know better.
So people who generally people who say that atoms are mostly empty space are
just being sloppy.
Mm they're just really thinking of the electron as a little tiny dot rather than
a wave function.
There is an exception to that because there is a fourth version of quantum
mechanics that is somewhat popular. I said three. I said many worlds,
hidden variables and spontaneous collapse.
There's another version that just says, look,
the wave function has nothing to do with reality in many worlds.
It's all of reality in spontaneous collapse. It's all of reality,
but it obeys different equations and hidden variables.
The wave function is part of reality, but there's also,
partparticles in the other approach,
which is called an episem approach to quantum mechanics.
The wave function is just a way of talking about your personal knowledge of the
world, your knowledge or lack of knowledge, your ignorance of the world.
So your wave function is just a tool you use to make a prediction for what the
experimental outcome is gonna be. Right?
And that's more or less what we teach our students. And this is approach says,
don't bother about reality.
What we should concern ourselves with is the experiences of agents
who make predictions and update their probability expectations of the world.
And so if someone like that, if you ask them, you know,
how is an electron located in an atom?
Or how is it an atom, mostly empty space? I think if they're honest,
they would say, don't ask those questions. Those are no,
we don't ask reality questions. We just ask, what are you gonna see?
Kinds of questions. Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
But I think that some of the less honest ones will say sure,
and Adam is mostly empty space. Cuz an electron has location somewhere.
We just don't know what it is.
Why do they approach it in this? What you,
the way you're describing it a sloppy way. Why,
why do you think that is so common?
Well, you know, it is part of, um,
the attitude that physicists physicists have did that.
We use quantum mechanics, but we don't try very hard to understand it.
So you can talk to plenty of physicists on the street and they will tell you to
your face, that understanding reality is not their job. And I,
I think that's terrible, but it, but they will say it.
And so when you press them too much on questions like, you know,
is the ATO mostly empty space?
You know what happens when they make an observation,
they just kind of get uncomfortable and say, no,
you're asking the wrong questions.
Let's ask questions about what will we see at the large Hadron collidder if we
smash protons together. Right? And those are perfectly questions too.
But I think that the what's really going on questions are also interesting.
So they don't care about these questions.
They will often be sloppy in answering them. Right. They don't, you,
it is hard like, like, like you said, it's, it's hard when you read the book.
It's hard when you write the book, it's hard.
When you think about these things as a professional physicist, it's,
it's not natural. It's not easy. It's not intuitive.
So even if you're a super duper expert at solving the equations and making pre
addictions understanding what's going on is a whole nother
activity that a lot of physicists don't try very hard to do.
Now, how was all this stuff verified or argued?
Like say your come, you're sitting down,
you're having a conversation with someone who, uh, spouses, a competing theory.
How are you guys working this out?
Good. I think that, um, if,
if everything were going along really, really well,
we would be making experimental predictions and testing them.
But I think the theorists have sort of dropped the ball here, um,
in the sense that the theoretical physicists should have since the 1930s
in developing these alternatives, like many worlds, hidden variables, whatever,
and make using them to make predictions. Um, but we really haven't.
They were neglected. They were backwaters. There were a few people,
a few plucky souls who, uh, really put their efforts into understanding.
These many of them got pushed out into philosophy departments. Um,
but that's what we need to do.
We need to like catch up on the last 70 years of lost time and
work out what the implications are of these ideas. So it's in the ball,
I think is in the theorist court, the experimenters are working hard.
Experimenters are doing amazing things with lasers and, um,
atoms and,
and learning about how to manipulate quantum systems at a delicate level.
But the theorists have not given them sharp, experimental questions that they,
that would really illuminate the foundations of quantum mechanics. So honestly,
what it is is a bunch of people get around a table and talk to each other.
<laugh>, you know, they're like, all right.
I think that what happens when the wave function branches is this.
So a typical question we'll try to address is in ordinary quantum
mechanics, we say, if I send the electron through one way,
or I send it through the elec the other way, there's a 50,
50 chance that I will see it go left or go, right. And someone says,
what do you mean 50 50 chance,
especially in many worlds where there's a 100% chance the will be a world where
it goes left and a world where it goes, right? How, what,
what is the meaning of the phrase? There's a 50, 50 chance.
What is the nature of probability in this game where everything is perfectly
deterministic, right?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> so that's not the kind of question that you a answer very
easily by doing an experiment, you have to think about it. Right?
So that's what, the kind of thing that we argue about now,
how often do you guys get together? Um, yeah, you know, it happens, uh,
there's conferences. It's a small community.
Someone asked me just the other day, cause you know,
the book came out something deeply hidden last week. And I been on book tour.
So I was on, uh, I was being interviewed and someone said,
how many people do you think in the world are,
would classify themselves as working on the foundations of quantum mechanics?
Um, um, maybe a hundred, something like that, not a very large number.
Like if you say how many people would classify themselves as particle
physicists, it would be tens of thousand.